The Joe Rogan.
Experience. So that's the tricky part. I mean, that's why,
that's why I like economists because economists are ruthless
bloodless. They almost don't know what humans are,
but they're very good at measuring costs and benefits.
And that's what I feel that our kind of political social media
discourse is missing.
People are all for the most part advocates or activists,
they pick up Blaine and they stay in it and they want to pave over the rest of
everybody's lanes and make it theirs. And it's not a good way to be.
No, it's not. You know,
that's an another episode that I was listening to of yours recently,
about how hard it is to get people, to change their mind on things. And, uh,
I forget who the expert was, who was talking,
but it was a really interesting point that he had about the mind.
Like people say, change your mind. You don't really have a mind.
You have the mind of the community.
And if you step outside the beliefs of the community,
it can be very bad for you in terms of like your personal connections with
people. And I really enjoyed that episode. It's funny.
Thanks. It's a, it's a paradox though, because the way you just said it,
like if you are in your tribe,
then even though it can be healthier for you and for
presumably many other people for you to change your mind,
or at least think differently about things, right? You,
you risk losing credibility or whatever. Yeah.
I mean some religions. I mean, that's how they keep you. Right?
You get ostracized. There's there's religions that we know for you.
If you decide to leave, you don't just get ostracized. You're you literally,
you have a death sentence. Like now you've, you've escaped our group.
You are you're, you're an outsider now.
Father,
who can both my parents converted from Judaism to Catholicism before they met
each other. Whoa. Yeah, it was, it was very unusual to happen. Uh,
it's a long story. I'll tell you if you really want to know, but anyway, I'll,
I'll, I'll do the short, what I'm getting to, and this was during the,
during the second world war, there were both in New York, both first-generation,
uh, American Jews. That makes sense.
They converted for different reasons from each other.
And then they met my father's family was Orthodox. Um,
and his father got named [inaudible], uh,
who'd come here when he was in his, maybe late twenties from Poland. He still lived
as everyday
in Brooklyn as if he were still in Poland. He didn't change at all. When my father converted and his father found out my father was in the war, he was overseas. He was home on leave and his father was cleaning up.
And from my father's pants that he left over a chair,
a rosary beads slipped out and fell on the floor.
That's how his Jewish father chefs will Dube.
Dubliner found out that his son had become a Catholic.
So what he did is he proceeded to, uh,
sit Shivah forum, the Jewish morning ritual,
where for seven days you mourn the dead. He,
he declared that he would never again speak to his son.
And he forbade everyone in his family from speaking his son.
So I, by the time I was born,
I was the youngest of eight kids in this family because they'd become very
Catholic.
I didn't know this whole family of my father's was unknown to me
entirely. So they did exactly what you're saying now. Holy.
Yeah. Yeah. That was what I thought too, when I hold it.
And my mothers did the same thing,
but it was less dramatic because her family was less religious.
So they still didn't like at all that she had converted. Um, but uh,
you got any children? Uh, yeah, I got a couple of Jewish again though.
I it's alongside my first,
the first book I wrote with long before Freakonomics was called turbulent souls.
Although it got then republished under a different title called choosing my
religion and it tells us this story of my, uh, my two parents around me. Yeah.
So I'd love to hear that,
but I just want to put in your head that what I was going to ask you is like,
how could you imagine a scenario where you would be capable of doing that
to your children?
So, uh, no chance, no chance, no chance,
but here's how scary. Yeah, it's scary. It is. But on the other hand,
I mean, this is, um, what Freakonomics is,
what I try to learn through doing Freakonomics is, you know,
to measure the what, and try to figure out the why,
but then not be the judge who says that was terrible.
This is wonderful because you know, different people have, look,
if chefs will do better, we're here. We can ask them,
what's your side of the story.
He could tell us a story that might convince us that, you know what,
this son of his did a terrible thing to the family. He did a terrible thing.
You know, he would say,
how could it be that we Jews existed for generations and generations and
generations. When every, we relived, there was always someone trying to,
you know, get rid of us. And then we finally come to America, you know,
the land of freedom, religious freedom, economic freedom,
and here after generations and generations of forefathers fought to stay Jewish
here, my son decides to become Catholic. What are you thinking? So, you know,
everybody, everybody's got a perspective,
everybody's got an emotional experience. So I try to respect that. But no,
I would not do that to my children.
I understand the outrage. I understand being upset,
but I can't understand choosing that over your son and over the relationship you
have with your son. Yeah.
That's ridiculous. The,
the saddest end of the stories then when that grandfather and my grandfather who
I never met, this was a long time ago. Uh, my father's father,
my father died when I was very young. So I didn't know this story either.
That was why I wrote this first book was to fight it, try to figure out this,
all of the stuff I'm telling you. Now,
none of this I knew until I was in my late twenties when I was writing this
book.
But when Shefsel Dubliner was dying of cancer in the maybe late fifties
or so, um, uh, a nephew of his, uh,
who my father used to be very close with and who looked a lot like my dad and
this guy was maybe in his early twenties, late teens by now,
he walked into the hospital room and Shep soul, you know,
on his deathbed really thought that that was my
father, his son, my, my, my dad's name was Solomon.
He called him [inaudible] and he was,
he was calling out to him [inaudible] as if he was, you know, um,
happy, happy to see him. It wasn't him though.
And my father didn't go visit his own father dying in the hospital because
he'd been forbidden to go anywhere near. Uh, yeah. So it was terrible.
So look,
this is why religion I've been long fascinated by
religion. And I think that again, if you think about it,
the way that economists think about things,
there are costs and there are benefits. And.
I think you're a hundred percent, right?
And then I think that's hard for people to handle. And, you know,
people are hardcore atheists where they don't see any value in it
whatsoever, even though people are there,
they're getting some sort of ethical value, moral value.
And the way I always put it as like,
it's like a scaffolding to live your life by,
you can live within these confines.
And it really kind of makes sense if you follow it loosely that we're doing to
try it for the benefit of community. And it's also like a real community, um,
sense that comes from meeting and Sunday with all those other or whatever day it
is with your, your religion.
And you meet in a group of other people that are also in the community.
And you all basically are saying together that
we should do good things and be good to people and treat each other the way
God would want us to like all that has undeniable benefits.
And it says differently is like, you're diluting yourself. Like your points,
the atheists who are hardcore,
who make points about the preposterous nature of a lot of religious texts,
there are on the money,
but it doesn't mean it doesn't mean that it doesn't give people a benefit and
that I,
I couldn't even disagree with them continuing it because there's a lot of people
that benefit greatly from really.
Someone wrote to us after that, uh, loneliness episode came out, um,
and said, how did you fail to write about,
uh, this supposed epidemic of loneliness without addressing the huge
decline in organized religion in America?
Which I thought was a very good piece of criticism. That would have been a good,
because you're right. It's a community. Yeah.
One other thing I would add to the list that you provided of what it can give is
humility, right? Because, you know,
if you have an image of some superior being, God deity,
whatever you want to call it, you kind of understand that one mortal is,
you know, the world does not revolve around me. The other thing I would say,
and look, I,
it's hard for me to scientifically logically embrace a lot of the arguments that
a lot of religions make, especially about things like the afterlife, right?
Yeah. That said even to an atheist,
I would suggest way to think about it is if someone does believe in those
rewards are in economic terms, we're talking about them as incentives,
even if it's a placebo effect. In other words, if I, if I'm encouraged to do,
to treat other people well on the S on the chance that if I do so
I ever award an internal reward, Hey,
it's not a bad reason to incentivize people to do well.
It sounds like a nice justification for them. Psychic houses. We drive by the,
at the neon sign. They're helping people,
giving people a sense what the future's going to be like.
How do you know they're to hope.
Might be, imagine if that's where the real psychics are, those neon signs.